# Progress
This section of the book will allow you to keep track of what I'm working on at any moment, what's going well (or not) and what to expect next. I will keep it updated frequently.

## Journal
**Jan 20th:** New introduction for the client-side chapter, including introduction to managing and protecting application state. The text is not proofread yet, so it hasn't made its way into the book yet, but if you're interested, you can already read it on **[GitHub](https://github.com/matthiasn/clojure-system-book/blob/master/manuscript/Client-Architecture.md).

**Jan 16th to Jan 19th:** Refactoring of the *state* namespace. It is now split up to have each involved namespace only handle a distinct aspect of state management. The subscribers to state updates, such as UI elements, do not have access to the atom that keeps the application state any longer, instead they will only be provided with the dereferenced state, which is immutable. Thus, the application state cannot be erroneously mutilated from parts of the system that do not have anything to do with managing application state. Drawings and a rewritten client side chapter are expected soon. Only read the current version when you want to get to know the not-so-great client code first in order to compare it with the better version later.

**Jan 9th to Jan 15th:** Redesign of the client-side architecture according to **[this blog post](http://matthiasnehlsen.com/blog/2015/01/09/Hairball-Removal/)**. Going well, I have so far removed pretty much all dependencies between namespaces. Only the state namespace is still larger than I'd want it to be. That'll be something to work on this weekend.

## Chapter Status
**Server Side:** I think the architecture is reasonably clean, with dependencies between different parts of the application reduced as much as possible. I am not completely sold on the necessity of the **Component library** though. While the advantages of reloading the application seem compelling, I have not made much use of that yet and haven't in a while. On the client side, I am dealing with the same issues around trying to avoid hairballs of interdependencies and I think I have succeeded, even without the added complexity required by Component. On the other hand, using Component adds good structure. Maybe I'd remove the channel components and have the channels provided by each component directly. I'm curious about your thoughts on this subject.

**Client Side (Jan 21, 2015):** The client-side application is rewritten to reflect the changes mentioned in the new introduction. The new introduction will now undergo proofreading before landing in the book. For now, read it on  **[GitHub](https://github.com/matthiasn/clojure-system-book/blob/master/manuscript/Client-Architecture.md) instead. Approach the existing chapters about the client side with care, they are about to change a lot.